# B4.1_Thinking fast and slow in 30 minutes.pdf

Copyright © 2013 by Garamond Press. Garamond Press is an imprint of Callisto Media, Inc.

A NOTE TO THE READER: You should purchase and read the book that has been reviewed. This book is meant to accompany a reading of the reviewed book and is neither intended nor offered as a substitute for the reviewed book.

This review is unofficial and unauthorized. This book is not authorized, approved, licensed, or endorsed by Daniel Kahneman or Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Garamond Press and the Garamond Press logo are trademarks of Callisto Media, Inc. and may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Unless explicitly stated otherwise, Garamond Press is not associated with any individual, organization, or product mentioned in this book.

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, except as permitted in accordance with the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior written permission of the publisher. Requests to the publisher for permission should be sent to permissions@callistomedia.com.

For general information on our other products and services or to obtain technical support, please contact our Customer Care Department at info@callistomedia.com.

The publisher makes no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaims all warranties, including, without limitation, warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering medical, legal, or other professional advice or services. If professional assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought. The publisher shall not be liable for damages arising herefrom.

The fact that an individual, organization, or website is referred to in this work in a citation and/or as a potential source of further information does not mean that the publisher endorses the information the individual, organization, or website may provide or recommendations they/it may make. Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.

ISBN: 978-1-62315-131-7 Print | 978-1-62315-132-4 eBook

Introduction: At a Glance

Understanding Thinking, Fast and Slow

About the Book

About the Author

Critical Reception

Key Concepts of Thinking, Fast and Slow

I. System 1 and System 2

II. Humans and Econs

III. The Remembering Self and the Experiencing Self

Conclusion: A Final Word

Recommended Reading

Bibliography

INTRODUCTION

At a Glance

This book is an extended review of Thinking, Fast and Slow, by Nobel Prize

laureate Daniel Kahneman. This internationally best-selling book is the culmination of five decades spent becoming the leading psychologist in the world today, as many reviewers of his book have called Kahneman. An intellectual memoir plus so much more, this book is intended for a mainstream audience, with the aim to provide a vocabulary for talking about decision making and judgment.

This review begins with a brief presentation of the book and its

author. You’ll learn about the origins of Thinking, Fast and Slow, and you’ll

come away with an initial impression of how critics and readers have responded to the book. You’ll also learn about Daniel Kahneman’s life and work.

Next comes a short digest of readers’ responses to the book—the good and the not so good, from professional reviewers as well as from other interested readers.

The next two sections of the review offer a synopsis of Kahneman’s book and a detailed discussion of its key concepts. Here you’ll find not just examples of the key concepts in practice but also ideas for applying them to your own life and experience. Finally, the main points of this review are briefly restated, and you’ll be well prepared to get your own copy of the complete book. Also included is a list of important terms

used in Thinking, Fast and Slow, and recommendations for further reading

about how humans think.

Understanding

Thinking, Fast and Slow

ABOUT THE BOOK

Daniel Kahneman wrote Thinking, Fast and Slow to bring the study of

decision making into common language and to provide the general reader a vocabulary for diagnosing predictable errors in judgments.

Kahneman traces the origins of Thinking, Fast and Slow to his work

with his friend, the late psychologist Amos Tversky (1937–1996), with whom he collaborated on work that led to Kahneman’s 2002 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences. Kahneman and Tversky met in 1969 and soon discovered their shared interest in the relationship between intuition and statistics. In 1974, they jointly published a still widely cited article, “Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,” in the journal

Science. That article demonstrated systematic errors caused by humans’

“machinery of cognition,” which contrasted with the then widely accepted notion that humans are rational beings whose emotions intrude on rational thinking. They went on to publish “Prospect Theory: An Analysis

of Decision Under Risk” in 1984 in American Psychologist, a study that

became one of the foundations of behavioral economics.

Kahneman remains interested in refining human understanding of

judgment and decision making. In Thinking, Fast and Slow, he looks more

closely at the two “systems” that he claims underlie human thought: System 1, which is fast, intuitive, and automatic; and System 2, which is slow, deliberate, and effortful. Published in 2011 (Farrar, Straus and

Giroux), Thinking, Fast and Slow has sold more than one million copies and has been praised by the Wall Street Journal (“\[a\] tour de force of

psychological insight”), Bloomberg/Businessweek (“a monumental achievement”), and the Financial Times (a “masterpiece . . . one of the

greatest and most engaging collections of insights into the human mind I

have ever read”). Thinking, Fast and Slow was selected as one of the best books of 2011 by the New York Times Book Review, the Globe and Mail, and the Economist. It was one of the Wall Street Journal’s Best Nonfiction Books of 2011 and won the Los Angeles Times Book Prize for Current

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Daniel Kahneman is Professor of Psychology and Public Affairs Emeritus and Senior Scholar at Princeton University’s Woodrow Wilson School. He is also the Eugene Higgins Professor of Psychology Emeritus at Princeton, and Fellow of the Center for Rationality at Hebrew University. He has held teaching positions in psychology at the University of British Columbia and at the University of California, Berkeley.

Kahneman was born on March 5, 1934, in Tel Aviv and spent his childhood in Paris, including during the Nazi occupation. Following his father’s death in 1948, the family moved to the British Mandatory Palestine just prior to Israel’s independence. He received a BS in psychology and mathematics from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 1954. He then served in the Israeli Army and went on to obtain a PhD in psychology from the University of California, Berkeley.

In addition to the 2002 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, Kahneman has been awarded numerous prizes (e.g., the Talcott Parsons Prize, Thomas Schelling Award for intellectual contribution to public policy) and honorary degrees from many top centers of learning, including the University of Michigan, University of Rome, Université de Paris, Harvard, University of East Anglia, Ben-Gurion University, The New

School, and University of Pennsylvania. In 2011, Foreign Policy magazine

included him on its list of top global thinkers.

Kahneman has also written Attention and Effort (Prentice Hall, 1973),

has edited several volumes of essays, and has published hundreds of

essays and articles in prestigious journals, including Harvard Business Review, Foreign Policy, American Economic Review, American Psychologist, and Stanford Law Review.

CRITICAL RECEPTION

Thinking, Fast and Slow received glowing reviews in major international media outlets, including the New York Times, the Financial Times, the Globe and Mail, the Guardian, the Wall Street Journal, the Washington Post, the Economist, the Atlantic, Publishers Weekly, and the Chronicle Review.

Several reviewers declared it a landmark book: David Brooks called it “a

major intellectual event” in the New York Times; William Easterly in the Financial Times called it a “masterpiece” and “one of the greatest and

most engaging collections of insights into the human mind I have read”;

and in the Globe and Mail, Janice Gross Stein wrote, “It is impossible to

exaggerate the importance of Daniel Kahneman’s contribution to the understanding of the way we think and choose. He stands among the giants, a weaver of the threads of Charles Darwin, Adam Smith and Sigmund Freud.”

Michael Lewis, in his lively Vanity Fair feature, called Kahneman “the

world’s most distinguished living psychologist.” It turns out that

Kahneman’s ideas informed Lewis’s book Moneyball (later made into a film, starring Brad Pitt), without Lewis even realizing it. In Moneyball,

Lewis had written about the Oakland A’s assistant general manager Paul DePodesta, who had studied behavioral economics at Harvard and, under General Manager Billy Beane, applied Kahneman’s concepts to revolutionize scouting in baseball. Lewis came to realize: “When you wander into the work of Kahneman and Tversky far enough, you come to find their fingerprints in places you never imagined even existed. . . . It didn’t take me long to figure out that, in a not so roundabout way, Kahneman and Tversky had made my baseball story possible.”

On Goodreads.com, 93 percent of those who read the book liked it. Many of these readers found it “richly rewarding” and appreciated how Kahneman explains complex ideas in a way the lay reader can understand. Several noted that that his book has forever changed how they think about thinking.

The Downside

In the Huffington Post, David K. Levine called Thinking, Fast and Slow

“tedious” and “remarkably smug,” and found some historical oversights (according to Levine, Nobel Prize–winning economist Maurice Allais discovered utility theory was wrong in 1953, not Kahneman and Tversky in 1979). Levine also faulted Kahneman’s ideas about reference points and the endowment effect:

“Unfortunately to build a theory based on the reference point is to build on foundations of sand. . . . \[I\]f you give people a coffee mug and ask them how much they will sell it back to you for, they state a high price, while if you keep the mug and ask how much they will pay for it, they state a low price. That’s not so surprising: we all know to buy low and sell high. But researchers are cleverer than that: the bidding rules are constructed so that you do best by stating your true value in both cases—hence the conclusion that people like the mug more if they have it than if they don’t. But do people really have an ‘endowment effect’? Or do they give a confused answer to a confusing question?”

Some Goodreads.com readers called the book a “monstrous chore,” “plodding,” and “clunky.” Some had difficulty with Kahneman’s explanations of mathematical concepts, and detected flaws and inconsistencies in his experiments. Even Michael Lewis finds Kahneman’s terminology tough going, but he recognizes this as a trait of psychologists in general: “The moment the psychologists uncover some new kink in the human mind, they bestow a strange and forbidding name on it (‘the availability heuristic’).”

In the New York Review of Books, Freeman Dyson’s mostly favorable

review lamented that Kahneman doesn’t discuss Sigmund Freud (as does

the Economist), philosopher William James, or the role of religion in

understanding human behavior. This is because Dyson holds Kahneman on par with Freud and James:

“Admirers of Freud and James may hope that the time may come when they will stand together with Kahneman as three great explorers of the human psyche, Freud and James as explorers of our deeper emotions, Kahneman as the explorer of our more humdrum cognitive processes. But that time has not yet come. Meanwhile, we must be grateful to Kahneman for giving us in this book a joyful understanding of the practical side of our personalities.”

Some reviewers questioned the feasibility of applying Kahneman’s

work in society. William Easterly in the Financial Times contended that

Kahneman’s take on “libertarian paternalism” overlooks the fact that the experts overseeing things like mandatory retirement savings plans “are as prone to cognitive biases as the rest of us. Those at the top will be overly confident in their ability to predict the system-wide effects of paternalistic

policy-making.” And Janice Gross Stein in the Globe and Mail questions

the logic of urging “people to take the emotion out of their decision-making” since emotion is itself part of the experiencing self.

The Economist elegantly notes the flaws and oversights of Thinking, Fast and Slow within the broader context of Kahneman’s overall

contribution to human thinking:

“Mr. Kahneman does not dwell on the possible evolutionary origins of our cognitive biases, nor does he devote much time to considering why some people seem naturally better at avoiding error than others. Still this book . . . is a profound one. As Copernicus removed the Earth from the centre of the universe and Darwin knocked humans off their biological perch, Mr. Kahneman has shown that we are not the paragons of reason we assume ourselves to be.”

In Thinking, Fast and Slow, Daniel Kahneman looks at the thinking that

shapes judgment and decision making. He hopes to enhance the everyday language about thinking to more accurately discuss, diagnose, and reduce errors.

Thought, Kahneman explains, has two distinct systems: the fast and intuitive System 1, and the slow and effortful System 2. Intuitive decision making can be effective; however, Kahneman highlights situations in which errors of judgment will occur unless System 2 is called in. Intuitive reasoning is least reliable with decisions that require predicting the future and assessing risks.

Decisions involving risk are at the mercy of System 1, which has a high aversion to loss. Loss aversion is so powerful, it even trumps one’s desire to gain and can lead to costly decisions, as Kahneman and Tversky’s prospect theory shows. Prospect theory was an important discovery not only in psychology, but also in economics, which had always assumed people were rational and acted in their own self-interest. Kahneman dubs these fictional personae Econs; he and Tversky believed humans were much different from Econs, and their transformative development of prospect theory engendered the field of behavioral economics.

Beyond economic theory, Kahneman believes decision-making research has practical applications that can directly impact people’s lives —such as their sense of well-being. Thinking about well-being needs to take into account our two selves—the experiencing self and the remembering self. He developed the U-index to measure experienced well-being (much more elusive than remembered well-being) in order to enrich discussions about public policy, medicine, and welfare. Citizens might be guided toward better decision making and more accurate judgments, Kahneman suggests, if behavioral economics were applied to policy making. And, he says, if countries included a measure of well-being in national statistics, it could help reduce human suffering globally.

On an individual level, Kahneman believes the ability to diagnose flaws in decision making has immediate personal value. Using an

enriched vocabulary for talking about decision making could help people identify patterns in judgment and choices he has observed over the course of his career. For example, calling the positive view audiences have of handsome, confident speakers the “halo effect” helps people recognize this intuitive bias when they see it again.

Kahneman’s ideal forum for the talk about decision making and judgment, which he hopes will catch on, is the office water cooler; he hopes first to improve how people gossip about others’ decision making, because it’s easier to recognize others’ errors than one’s own. Ultimately, he hopes everyone gains a better understanding of errors of judgment and choice.

Key Concepts of

Thinking, Fast and Slow

Kahneman aligns humans’ two distinct modes of thinking—fast and slow —with two “agents,” which he calls System 1 and System 2. We constantly switch between the two when making decisions and judgments, frequently falling prey to the biases and illusions that define the difference between humans and Econs—the unified, rational agents of traditional economics, who consistently act in their own best interest. Kahneman also identifies two selves—the remembering self and the experiencing self—when people talk about their lives.

I. SYSTEM 1 AND SYSTEM 2

Two agents handle human thinking: System 1 and System 2. Busy System 1 is fast, is intuitive, and cannot be turned off; it engages the automatic mental activities of perception and memory. Sluggish System 2 handles slow, effortful, deliberate thinking and is lazy. When System 1 presents a plausible story, System 2 will often pass it through uncritically. One may believe a rational choice has been made, when in fact it was not. Kahneman looks mostly at System 1 and explores how it relates and interacts with System 2.

Although most people self-identify with System 2, who concentrates, reasons, performs complex mental tasks, makes choices, and is in charge of self-control, most beliefs and choices actually begin with the automatic impressions and beliefs of System 1, “the hero of the book.”

System 1 is constantly sorting through feelings and memories to make suggestions to System 2, the decision maker. Usually, this process

serves one well. However, System 1 tends to have biases, and relies on the most readily available answers, which can cause judgment errors System 2 can’t detect. System 2 is too slow to sort through every decision, and so the two end up compromising. In fact, System 2 can seem reluctant to exert more effort than necessary to complete tasks. But there are some tasks that only System 2, “the working mind,” can perform, such collecting and analyzing data to make rational decisions.

When System 2 is at work, it shows: the pupils dilate, the heart rate increases, and the inability to see anything other than the required task takes hold. These are the physical signs of cognitive strain, a mental state that makes one literally stop and think in order to reallocate energy from other tasks while System 2 performs the work involved in making choices.

Most of the time System 1 interprets one’s everyday perception of reality. System 1 builds a model for what is normal in one’s world by making automatic associations among situations, occurrences, and outcomes. Over time, these associative links get stronger and help one evaluate the present and the future. Because of shared references, people are able to communicate with one another. Surprise occurs when an event does not fit one’s model’s norms. Reluctant to turn to System 2 for help, System 1 automatically tries to make it fit and assigns a plausible cause for the aberrant item instead of admitting uncertainty, doubt, and consulting statistics—all functions only System 2 can handle. However, when busy or tired, lazy System 2 will not question data that aligns with prevailing beliefs.

Quick to jump to conclusions, System 1 often falls prey to the halo effect—accepting a favorable impression and automatically adding more for cohesion (e.g., System 1 might automatically assume a smiling cowboy in a white hat is a good guy, despite evidence he’s a maniacal murderer). It is System 2’s job to curb the halo effect, but because System 1 can’t determine what data is necessary, it draws conclusions based on the nearest associative data and readily leaps to a conclusion that favors its first bias. Kahneman calls this What You See Is All There Is, or WYSIATI—a pervasive System 1 tendency that induces cognitive ease. If System 2 is not jolted out of cognitive ease, it will likely endorse the

false conclusion. So thinking fast makes one overconfident in quick decisions that ignore critical data for the sake of reinforcing a first impression.

Another System 1 tendency is avoidance. To escape complex questions (e.g., “How happy are you with your life?”), System 1 substitutes simpler, heuristic questions and answers those instead (e.g., “What is my mood right now?”). The heuristic question is adequate, though imperfect, and so is its answer. It often satisfies System 2 without further scrutiny. To avoid numbers, System 1 will seek the comfort and coherence of the anchoring effect. When one hears a number or price (e.g., a listing price on a house), it can influence one’s impression of an estimate. A low anchor will prime us for low estimates and a high anchor for high estimates, even with experienced estimators (e.g., real estate agents). System 1 quickly creates a context in which the anchor value is the correct number, when in fact it was simply the most available.

Because System 2 is lazy, people tend not to invest the effort and cognitive strain required to analyze data and produce truly rational decisions. They become susceptible to cognitive illusions. Two pervasive types of cognitive illusion are the illusion of validity and the illusion of skill. In the world of finance, traders feel confident in their skills and abilities, and the financial industry supports this belief. The more coherent a story, the more confidence people have that it’s valid, even if it isn’t true. But statistics show that traders’ success at picking stocks is as random as rolling dice. Even when Kahneman proved to directors of an investment firm that their traders’ performance did not correlate with financial outcomes, the firms continued rewarding traders based on luck rather than skill. With System 1 processes operating constantly, automatically, and unconsciously, intuitive decisions are routinely mistaken for rational ones. A high level of confidence in someone making forecasts is never a reliable measure of accuracy; in fact, low confidence could be better, because it might prompt System 2 to step up to the plate.

Examples from Thinking, Fast and Slow

System 1’s preference for what seems true rather than what is more likely can fool even those with advanced training in statistics and probability. Kahneman and his research partner invented a powerful and controversial illustration of this fact in a fictional character named Linda. Thirty-one, single, outspoken, and bright, Linda majored in philosophy, cares about social justice, and participated in antinuclear demonstrations at college. Kahneman’s research team asked students —including students and some professors of probability—whether Linda was more likely to have become (a) a bank teller, or (b) a bank teller and feminist. Most picked (b). They were intuitively swayed by the specific details about Linda and bypassed a basic rule of the logic of probability: specifics narrow probability. They committed the conjunction fallacy, thinking the conjunction of two events makes an outcome more probable than one of the events. “Feminist bank teller” seemed so plausible to System 1 that System 2’s capacity for deciding probability wasn’t engaged.

System 1 is constantly making associations, rapidly linking one idea with another in plausible ways that instruct body and mind throughout

the waking day. If one hears the word eat and someone asks her to fill in the missing letters in S \_ \_ P, she is more likely to spell soup than soap. This is called priming. Eat primes the brain to think about food. Priming

can be a powerful tool; for example, it can affect voting: if a polling station is in a school, voters are more likely to support increasing school funding on a ballot. Priming can affect how one behaves toward others: thoughts of money can make people behave more selfishly. And it can affect how people react to authority: when reminded of mortality, people are more accepting of authoritarian ideas, which can seem reassuring. These behaviors are unconscious. System 2 believes it is an autonomous agent, but the mind hides its inner workings from itself.

Applying the Concept

Stop and think. The next time you’re tempted to send a text message while driving, think twice. Kahneman’s research shows that it’s possible to carry out two simple activities at the same time under cognitive ease,

such as driving and humming a tune. However, performing a series of more complicated tasks—such as picking up a phone, opening an app, and typing a message—engenders cognitive strain, forcing one to literally stop and think as System 2 channels energy toward completing each task.

Math is not hard. Engaging System 2 is draining. In fact, if a task becomes too difficult, one’s pupils contract, and System 2 seems to give up, like an overloaded circuit breaker—or like a kid struggling with math. You can avoid this overload by breaking down tasks, or math problems, into multiple easy steps. If your child is struggling with a

problem, simplify it to the point that it would be impossible not to

understand, and then praise her when she gets the right answer. You’ll help her overcome System 2’s lazy tendencies, and you’ll build confidence in her abilities.

Buy what you need. Grocery stores know about anchoring. In-store promotions are designed to get you to buy more than you might need. The next time you see “three lemons for one dollar” at the store, go against the anchor and buy only one, if that’s all you need. You’ll pay only thirty-three cents for it.

II. HUMANS AND ECONS

Standard economics presupposes people are rational beings—which Kahneman calls the Econs—but this does not reflect how humans actually decide things. Emotions play a much more significant role in decision making than most people realize, and they hold a particularly powerful influence over financial choices, especially when it comes to avoiding loss.

Almost three hundred years ago, scientist Daniel Bernoulli theorized that people don’t make money decisions based on numeric values, but rather on the psychological values that result—their utilities. But Bernoulli’s utility theory, according to Kahneman, is flawed because it fails to consider a reference point from which to weigh options before choosing. For example, persons A and B each have five million dollars

today. Yesterday, A had nine million dollars and B had one million dollars. According to utility theory, they should be equally happy. However, in this case, obviously A would be miserable to have lost four million dollars in one day. Person A has a different reference point from person B.

Prospect theory addresses blind spots of utility theory, such as reference points, but has blind spots of its own: disappointment and regret. Sometimes money choices are based on whether or not a desired item is already in one’s possession. If Professor R bought a rare bottle of wine for thirty-five dollars and Professor T asks to buy it for one hundred dollars, Professor R has to consider the pain of letting it go—this is called the endowment effect. If Professor T does not yet own the wine and wants it, then he has to consider the pleasure of getting it. As illogical as it may be, people do not perceive the two points equally, but instead, tend to assign the pain of loss greater weight.

Loss aversion can cause people to expend more effort to avoid loss than to achieve gains, even when loss is unlikely. Similarly, people often overweight the probability of rare events in decision making. Perceiving an unlikely outcome, such as a terrorist attack, with vivid detail can disrupt one’s ability to calculate its true risk. One then becomes prone to overestimating its probability. Overweighting probability and overestimating risk both stem from System 1 thinking. The more vivid a possible outcome in one’s mind, the more weight the mind applies in that outcome’s favor, and the less capable System 2 will be of making an accurate assessment.

Worries about loss of wealth are not just economic; they are also emotional. People keep mental accounts of all kinds, which is a form of narrow framing that can lead to irrational money decisions. For example, when one sells a stock to free up some cash, he most likely chooses one that is up over the purchase price. This is the disposition effect. In fact, it would likely be better to sell a losing stock since the winner might continue to climb, and the loser is unlikely to turn around. Continuing to invest in a losing proposition is called the sunk-cost fallacy—not a wise choice. Sometimes one makes mistakes like these to avoid punishing oneself with regret later on. Kahneman says a better way to alleviate regret is to explicitly anticipate it. If the outcome is bad, remembering

that one considered the possibility of regret beforehand will decrease its effect.

Life usually presents a narrow frame that allows people only single evaluation choices. But Kahneman says people make more rational choices when provided a broader, more inclusive frame. For example, when asked separately to donate to efforts to (a) save endangered dolphins, or (b) prevent skin cancer in farm workers, people often donate more to dolphins. However, when presented these choices together, as a joint evaluation, most people change their minds (making a preference reversal) and donate more to farm workers. Comparative judgments require System 2 and are likely to be more stable than single evaluations, which are susceptible to System 1’s emotions.

System 1 is highly susceptible to emotional framing. If offered two choices, (a) a 10 percent chance of winning ninety-five dollars and a 90 percent chance of losing five dollars, or (b) pay five dollars for a lottery ticket that gives 10 percent odds of winning one hundred dollars and a 90 percent chance of winning nothing, most people would choose (b) even though System 2 should tell them it’s exactly the same as (a). System 2 is lazy, and without even realizing it, most people can be steered to make decisions, from moral to financial, according to how they are framed. People rarely have the chance to discover which of their preferences are frame bound rather than reality bound. Only by engaging System 2 in decision making can one escape these emotional biases.

Examples from Thinking, Fast and Slow

Loss aversion can lead to poor decisions. Optimists, on the other hand, can be too willing to gamble. When individuals and organizations face decisions involving financial risks, it’s advisable to find the middle ground between these two extremes. Kahneman recommends combining the outside view with a risk policy (e.g., never buying extended warranties). The outside view shifts one’s focus from the immediate situation to the statistical outcomes of similar situations. Adopting a risk policy helps the overly cautious through broad framing —a general strategy that accepts occasional losses alongside

occasional gains. Adjusting one’s stock portfolio quarterly instead of tinkering with it every day is another example of broad framing.

Kahneman discusses two common features of intuitive decision

making: the possibility effect—weighting highly unlikely outcomes more than they deserve, and the certainty effect—giving near-certain

outcomes less weight than their probability justifies. These effects are

features of the fourfold pattern:

1. When a gain is probable, the certainty effect makes most people risk averse. They’ll pay a premium for certainty (e.g., they’ll accept a settlement in a lawsuit they were likely to win).

2. When a loss is probable and a bad outcome almost certain, the certainty effect makes people willing to take a risk to avoid it (e.g., they’ll refuse to pay a settlement in a lawsuit they’re likely to lose).

3. When a gain is unlikely, the possibility effect kicks in, and most people are willing to take a risk (e.g., buy a lottery ticket).

4. When a loss is unlikely, the possibility effect now makes people risk averse, and most will pay to avoid it (e.g., they’ll buy insurance).

Applying the Concept

Hold the flame retardant. You’ve probably noticed all kinds of businesses attempting to upsell you, be it in a restaurant—Do you want fries with that?—or mattress stores. The latter often use narrow framing to try to convince you to pay for a flame retardant spray. Don’t fall for it. If you broaden the frame, you immediately realize that in the unlikely event of a fire in your home, even if the spray worked, the mattress would be so infused with smoke that you’d never want to sleep on it again. Skip the spray and buy a carbon monoxide detector instead.

You’re getting a 10 percent raise! And then you find out your coworker, with the same experience and responsibilities as you, already makes 20 percent more than you. Your coworker’s salary has become your reference point, and now you’re not nearly as happy about your raise.

III. THE REMEMBERING SELF AND THE EXPERIENCING SELF

Kahneman believes people possess two selves: the self that experiences and the self that reports about it. These two selves are remarkably distinct. What one actually experiences and what one ultimately remembers are two very different things—especially when it comes to happiness.

The experiencing self cannot speak, so the remembering self tells stories about what happened—stories that typically neglect duration in favor of the emotional peaks that stand out: the brief argument that spoiled a couple’s otherwise long and pleasant evening dining out with lifelong friends. Endings, in particular, get a lot of emphasis from the remembering self: a delicious dessert that makes up for an otherwise mediocre meal. Ultimately, one’s future preferences are shaped by distorted accounts of one’s experiencing self: the couple prefer to spend future evenings dining with less combative friends but decide to give the mediocre restaurant another try. Memory is not the ideal resource to consult to review the past for decisions about the future.

Most people remember emotional highs and lows that don’t reflect their actual experience over the course of the event—in the preceding example, before the argument, everyone was having a wonderful time, despite the food, until dessert arrived; but the remembering self reverses these. Ideally, one would like to extend pleasure and limit pain. However, System 1’s weak grasp of duration makes it difficult to identify long pleasure and short pains.

The experiencing self navigates one’s life. Meanwhile, the remembering self constructs stories to look back on. In these stories and in studies that reflect people’s evaluations of their entire lives, peaks and ends count much more than duration. Whether a life is relatively long or short, most people believe what is important is how one feels at the end. Would a vacation seem worthwhile if all one’s memories of it were wiped out at the end? Or would one willingly undergo surgery without anesthetic as long as an amnesia-inducing drug were given at the end?

People are largely indifferent to the feelings of the experiencing self. The remembering self is who one is.

According to Kahneman, happiness studies have traditionally focused on life satisfaction, a function of the remembering self. To measure the well-being of the experiencing self, or one’s experienced well-being, Kahneman developed the U-index. The U-index measures the percentage of time one spends per day in an unpleasant state: four hours of a sixteen-hour day in an unpleasant state gives a U-index of 25 percent. If two of those hours are spent commuting to and from work, one could move closer to the office and cut that U-index in half. But happiness is complicated. Focusing on experienced well-being to measure happiness ignores the importance of life satisfaction to the remembering self. And focusing on one’s overall life satisfaction ignores the importance of experienced well-being.

Sometimes one thinks buying something, like a new car, will bring happiness; Kahneman calls this affective forecasting, pointing out that the thrill fades with time. In another example, maybe moving to a warmer climate will make one happy. However, this is a focusing illusion that over-weights climate and underweights other determinants of well-being. As for whether or not money buys happiness, Kahneman has found that beyond about seventy-five thousand dollars, household income had no effect on experienced well-being. He believes this is because wealth actually reduces the impact of life’s smaller pleasures. Higher income earners do report greater life satisfaction; however, Kahneman believes life satisfaction and experienced well-being are two different things.

To Kahneman, scientific advances in understanding happiness have made it only more puzzling. Therefore, he has come to accept a hybrid view of happiness that considers the well-being of both the experiencing and remembering selves.

Examples from Thinking, Fast and Slow

The peak rule and duration neglect. A man enjoyed listening to a long symphony that had a cacophonous ending due to a bad recording. Later, he judges the whole experience negatively, but he is confusing the

jarring conclusion with the actual experience. The most intense moment—the emotional peak—was negative, and it has distorted his memory. This is the peak rule. Basing his future musical preferences on that distorted memory is called duration neglect.

U-indexing the world. Knowing one’s U-index could help one decide to spend more time doing enjoyable things. Ideally, this means reducing the duration of unpleasant activities, such as commuting to work (which many people report makes them unhappy), as well as of passive pleasure, such as TV watching, and increasing active leisure, such as socializing and exercise. Improving the U-index for society as a whole would mean providing good pubic transportation, child care, and more socializing for the elderly. A worldwide U-index reduction of 1 percent would mean millions of hours less of global suffering.

Applying the Concept

Reading the peaks. You have hit your sales targets for the eighth week in a row, but your boss just told you overall sales are way down this week. Wait until overall sales improve before asking about your bonus.

Improve your U-index. You feel happier after some exercise, which you enjoy even though you never find the time for it. Set your alarm a half hour earlier in the morning and walk partway to work. You’ll improve your U-index and your health.

Key Takeaways

Kahneman articulates dual-process human thinking: Automatic, intuitive, always-on System 1 makes most everyday decisions and choices. But it is not good at solving problems because it overly approximates and is prone to illusions, biases, and mistakes. Slow, deliberate, analytical System 2 is the better problem solver. But it is lazy and reluctant to question System 1’s conclusions, especially when they

seem plausible, cohesive, and convincing. Developing awareness of these two systems and noticing them at work in others can help correct and prevent mistakes.

With these two systems in mind, it becomes readily apparent that humans are not Econs. Humans are not always rational: System 1’s intuitions and emotions play a huge part in decision making and risk assessment, leading to mistakes from overconfidence, overweighting probability, and overestimating risk, even among experts. By simply slowing down before making important decisions and seeking assistance from System 2, one can broaden the frame for a problem, gather pertinent data, arrive at a decision, reflect upon it, and review it for accuracy.

Not only do we have two systems, we also have two selves—the experiencing self and the remembering self—and they can give surprisingly different reports on our sense of well-being. Aligned with System 1, the remembering self reports inaccurately, according disproportionate weight to emotional peaks and ignoring significantly longer periods of time. It is our experiencing self, operating at an ever-increasing distance from our remembering self, that knows the score. One’s account of his or her happiness can be unreliable, unless it accounts for both selves.

A Final Word

Kahneman believes decision-making research has practical applications. The concept of considering the well-being of the two selves—the experiencing self and the remembering self—for example, contributes to richer discussions about public policy, medicine, and welfare. And if countries included a measure of well-being in national statistics, Kahneman suggests, it could help reduce human suffering globally. Citizens might be guided toward better decision making and more accurate judgments if behavioral economics were applied to nation policy making. This is happening already, in the United States and abroad.

On an individual level, the ability to diagnose flaws in decision making has immediate personal value. For the very reasons that organizations make better decisions (they move more slowly and employ useful checklists), anyone can prevent errors in their own judgment. By simply slowing down before making important decisions and seeking assistance from System 2, one can broaden the frame for a problem, gather pertinent data, arrive at a decision, reflect upon it, and review it for accuracy.

You have now glimpsed the culmination of Nobel Prize–winner Daniel Kahneman’s many years of work on human thinking. You have

learned the key concepts of Thinking, Fast and Slow, but you haven’t

experienced Kahneman’s humor nor read his many telling anecdotes firsthand. Now that this review has broken down some of the complex ideas in Kahneman’s book, you will get even more out of reading the complete book. Your System 2 will thank you.

anchoring  the instance of a person’s estimate being skewed by a previously stated value. When a particular value is attached to a quantity or object before one has the chance to make an estimate (e.g., at a fine-art auction or a used-car lot), one’s subsequent estimate will hew close to the original value, anchoring the perceived value. This occurs because lazy System 2 too readily accepts data from System 1, which is susceptible to the powerful bias that anchors produce. Even experienced real estate agents, when asked to estimate a house price after hearing a high anchor, produce inflated estimates. Kahneman suggests training System 2 to adjust away from the anchor. Studies have shown that simply shaking one’s head upon hearing an anchor can help mitigate its effect.

cognitive ease  a relaxed and gullible state in which one can become susceptible to illusions. Good moods reign, one’s guard is down, and trusting, positive, superficial thoughts rush in, including a propensity for liking what one sees and hears. Repetition becomes appealing, even though it produces illusions of familiarity (e.g., a name seen in print multiple times begins to seem familiar). System 1 predominates.

cognitive illusions  the errors of intuitive thought produced by quickthinking System 1. There are many types of cognitive illusions: biases, priming, the anchoring effect, the illusion of validity, the illusion of skill, the conjunction fallacy, the disposition effect, etc. Kahneman explains all of these and more in great detail. The best way to counteract and avoid these mistakes in System 1 thinking is to actively engage System 2; but since constant vigilance over one’s every waking thought is impossible, the best one can do is become aware of the most likely situations where cognitive illusions can cause errors of judgment.

cognitive strain  a state where one is vigilant, critical and analytical, and leads to rational thinking. When unhappiness or cognitive strain triggers System 2 into action, vigilance takes the place of ease, and there is an effort to ward off a perceived threat. One is more likely to reject System 1’s easy answers, and System 2 shifts from intuitive to analytic thinking. The accuracy of one’s thoughts depends on cognitive ease or cognitive strain.

duration neglect  basing one’s future decisions on a distorted memory of an experience. An idyllic monthlong boat cruise that ended with the ship losing power during the final two days will be remembered badly. Most of the cruise was pleasurable, but if the calamitous last two days cause a person to decide never to go on a cruise vacation again, he or she is committing duration neglect.

Econs  Kahneman’s term for standard economists’ portrayal of human beings as rational agents who act in their own best interest. Kahneman’s two-system model presents a deep challenge to this rationality assumption. System 1 features, such as biases, illusions, and framing effects, ensure that when making choices, humans deviate from rules of rationality.

experiencing self  The self who navigates one’s life. Kahneman believes people possess two selves: the self that experiences and the self that reports about it. The experiencing self cannot speak, so the remembering self tells stories about what happened—stories that typically neglect duration in favor of the emotional peaks that stand out. Ultimately, one’s preferences are shaped by distorted accounts of one’s experiencing self.

framing  the deliberate and selective presentation of information meant to elicit a specific emotional response. For example, describing sausages as 90 percent fat-free makes them seem more healthful than saying they contain 10 percent fat; both convey the same facts, but the distinct framing induces much different results. Kahneman discusses different types of framing: narrow framing, wherein one focuses one’s attention on simple decisions and risks losing sight of the big picture; broad framing, which pulls back to consider the bigger picture; and emotional framing, which can be an effective way to manipulate decisions in everything from

health care to real estate to online dating. People rarely have the chance to discover which of their preferences are frame-bound rather than reality-bound.

halo effect  the tendency to associate only positive qualities with someone who makes a positive first impression—even if one knows very little about the person—and vice versa. Kahneman noticed he graded his psychology students uniformly over the course of a term; e.g., “A” students tended to continue to get As on subsequent papers. When he read their next papers without looking at their names first, the trend changed. He realized the initial grades had produced a halo effect. Moreover, even when the facts are in, the halo effect persists. When Kahneman realized the halo effect had influenced his grading, he still had the strong urge to hew to the initial grade (but resisted it).

heuristics  mental shortcuts and rules of thumb that one tends to rely on when making decisions and judgments. For example, in search of coherence and plausibility, System 1 frequently relies on the most readily available information, rather than the best or most ample information, when making a decision, prediction, or estimate. This is the availability heuristic.

peak rule  an extremely positive or negative emotional peak that shapes one’s memory of an experience; for instance, the burst balloon that frightens a child and ruins her birthday party, or the delicious complimentary dessert that makes up for an overcooked steak at a restaurant.

prospect theory  a psychological theory developed by Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman concerned with how people make decisions about simple gambles. Prospect theory is one of the foundations of behavioral economics, and Kahneman was awarded the Nobel Prize for his contribution to this field’s development. Unlike utility theory, prospect theory takes the reference state into consideration. It defines outcomes as gains and losses rather than as states, and reveals how losses have a bigger subjective impact than do gains.

reference point  People evaluate losses or gains relative to a value, or reference point, they already have in mind. One will be happier about a raise if it exceeds the amount one expected to get, and vice versa. Kahneman explains how utility theory, a prevailing theory in standard economics, fails to take into account reference points.

remembering self  This self is one who is. Aligned with System 1, the remembering self reports inaccurately, according disproportionate weight to emotional peaks and ignoring significantly longer periods of time. Kahneman believes people possess two selves: the experiencing self and the self that reports about it.

System 1  the fast and intuitive system of thought. Fast thinking engages the automatic mental activities of perception and memory. System 1 tends to have biases and relies on the most readily available answers, which can cause judgment errors System 2 can’t detect. Psychologists Keith Stanovich and Richard West originated System 1 and System 2 to describe the brain’s two-system thought process. Kahneman personifies System 1 and System 2 as agents. According to Kahneman most beliefs and choices begin with the automatic impressions and beliefs of System 1, “the hero of the book.”

System 2  the slow and deliberate system of thought. Kahneman believes most people self-identify with System 2, which concentrates, reasons, performs complex mental tasks, makes choices, and is in charge of self-control. System 2 is too slow and effortful to sort through every decision, and so System 1 and System 2 end up compromising.

U-index  Kahneman created the U-index in order for people and/or society to measure the percentage of time spent per day in an unpleasant state: four hours of a sixteen-hour day in an unpleasant state gives a U-index of 25 percent. Ideally, one’s U-index is low. Knowing one’s U-index could help one decide to spend more time doing enjoyable things. Ideally, this means reducing the duration of unpleasant activities (e.g., commuting) as well as of passive pleasure (e.g., TV watching), and increasing active leisure (e.g., socializing and exercise). U-indexes can be used to consider ways of reducing suffering on a societal level—for example, improving public transportation, paving roads, and providing

affordable health care and education can improve the U-index of a society that suffers from the lack of such public goods.

utility theory  a theory developed in 1738 by Swiss scientist Daniel Bernoulli, who observed that people make financial choices based not on particular dollar values, but on the psychological values of outcomes, their utilities. This theory assumes that the utility of one’s wealth is what

makes one more or less happy. But, as Kahneman explains in Thinking, Fast and Slow, utility theory looks at only the state of wealth to determine

its utility and fails to account for reference points.

WYSIATI  Kahneman’s anagram for What You See Is All There Is. System 1 is not good at dealing with the unknown; it prefers to create plausible stories out of accessible data, which, as long as it coheres, System 2 accepts as true. If information is scarce or of poor quality, System 1 simply jumps to conclusions on the basis of the most readily available data. In this way, what is most apparent and accessible becomes all that we see. WYSIATI engenders cognitive ease; it enables us to think fast and to process complex information quickly. WYSIATI is also at the root of the many cognitive illusions Kahneman identifies, including overconfidence, framing, and base-rate neglect.

Recommended Reading

In addition to Thinking, Fast and Slow (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011),

the following books—some mentioned by Kahneman—touch on similar themes and subjects, and are well worth exploring:

Dan Ariely, Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our Decisions (HarperCollins, 2008)

Psychologist and behavioral economist Dan Ariely aims to reveal the systematic mistakes people make when making decisions based on rational thought, in the hope that they will learn to avoid them.

Christopher Chabris and Daniel Simons, The Invisible Gorilla: How Our Intuitions Deceive Us (Crown Publishers, 2010)

Psychologists Christopher Chabris and Daniel Simons reveal that people may think they know how their minds work, but they are often surprised to discover this isn’t the case. They invented the now famous Invisible Gorilla Test, which reveals that when people focus on one thing, they frequently overlook something else that is happening at the same time— such as a gorilla walking across the frame of a video of people playing basketball.

Atul Gawande, The Checklist Manifesto: How to Get Things Right

(Metropolitan Books, 2009)

Surgeon and journalist Atul Gawande’s The Checklist Manifesto reveals

the importance of organization and preplanning in everything from medicine to disaster recovery to business.

James Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the Many Are Smarter than the Few and How Collective Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, Societies, and Nations (Doubleday, 2004)

Touching on economics and psychology, New Yorker columnist James Surowiecki’s The Wisdom of Crowds is about how making decisions based

on information that has aggregated within groups can have better results than individual decision making.

Nassim Nicholas Taleb, The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable (Random House, 2007)

Epistemologist Nassim Nicholas Taleb focuses on the human tendency to make overly simplistic explanations for certain rare and unpredictable events—a tendency, thanks to Taleb, now known as the black swan theory.

Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness (Penguin, 2008)

Behavioral economists Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein’s Nudge

focuses on choices, looking at how people make them and how they can improve them. It has influenced national policies that “nudge” people toward good decisions without compromising their sense of freedom (e.g., employee pension plans with opt-out, rather than opt-in, boxes).

Timothy D. Wilson, Strangers to Ourselves: Discovering the Adaptive Unconscious (President and Fellows of Harvard College, 2002)

Psychologist Timothy D. Wilson reveals the hidden mental processes that people use to evaluate the world, make goals, and take action. Wilson demonstrates that people’s actions and others’ impressions of them can reveal more about who they are than they realize.

Bibliography

David Brooks, “Who You Are”

New York Times, October 20, 2011

http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/21/opinion/brooks-who-you-are.html?\_r=0

Christopher F. Chabris, “Why the Grass Seems Greener”

Wall Street Journal, October 22, 2011 http://online.wsj.com/article/

SB1000142405297020447 95045766390321 03005502. html

Freeman Dyson, “How to Dispel Your Illusions”

New York Review of Books, December 22, 2011 http://www.nybooks.com/

articles/ archives/2011/ dec/22/how-dispel-your-illusions/? pagination=false

William Easterly, “ ‘Thinking, Fast and Slow’: Why Even Experts Must Rely on Intuition and Often Get It Wrong”

Financial Times, November 5, 2011

http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/15bb6522-04ac-11e1-91d9-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2Q5Y6diDv

Evan R. Goldstein, “The Anatomy of Influence”

Chronicle Review, November 8, 2011 http://chronicle.com/article/the-

anatomy-of-influence/129688/

Jim Holt, “Two Brains Running”

New York Times Book Review, November 25, 2011

http://www.nytimes.com/ 2011/11/27/ books/review/ thinking-fast-and-slow-by-daniel-kahneman-book-review.html?pagewanted=all

Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, “Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases”

Science 185, no. 4157 (September 1974), 1124–31

Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk”

Econometrica 47, no. 2 (March 1979), 263–92

Michael Lewis, “The King of Human Error”

Vanity Fair, December 2011 http://www.vanityfair.com/ culture/

features/2011/12/ michael-lewis-201112

David K. Levine, “Thinking Fast and Slow and Poorly and Well”

Huffington Post, September 22, 2012

http://www.huffingtonpost.com/david-k-levine/thinking-fast-and-slow-an\_b\_1906061.html

“Not So Smart Now: The Father of Behavioural Economics Considers the Feeble Human Brain”

Economist, October 29, 2011 http://www.economist.com/node/21534752

Maria Popova, “The Anti-Gladwell: Kahneman’s New Way to Think about Thinking”

Atlantic, November 1, 2011 http://www.theatlantic.com/ health/archive/

2011/11/the- anti-gladwell-kahnemansnew-way-to-think-about-thinking/247407/

Christopher Shea, “ ‘Thinking, Fast and Slow,’ by Daniel Kahneman”

Washington Post, December 16, 2011

http://articles.washingtonpost.com/2011-12-16/entertainment/35285045\_1\_danielkahneman-israeli-army-amos-tversky

Janice Gross Stein, “ ‘Thinking, Fast and Slow’, by Daniel Kahneman”

Globe and Mail, November 25, 2011

Galen Strawson, “ ‘Thinking, Fast and Slow’ by Daniel Kahneman— Review”

Guardian, December 13, 2011 http://www.guardian.co.uk/

books/2011/dec/ 13/thinking- fast-slow-daniel-kahneman

“Thinking Fast and Slow”

Publishers Weekly, October 3, 2011 http://www.publishersweekly.com/978-

0-374-27563-1

